Once around exomoons.
So exomoons are moons of planets that
are themselves orbiting around stars
other than the sun. Now we detect
planets by looking for the light dip
when the planet transits in front of the
main star blocking some of the light.
And we would get a curve where as the
planet moved in front, the amount of
light would drop perhaps by a fraction
of a percent because planets are much
smaller than stars.
But we're getting so good at looking at
these that we can perhaps detect little
side dips where the planet is
accompanied by a companion,
a small exomoon. And the diagram on the
right here shows the sort of brightness
of the star bouncing up and down with
all those little white uh specks on the
graph, taking a dip where the main
planet went across in front and then
having a smaller dip just to the right
as the planet is followed across the
face of the star by a moon.
And uh if we can find that sort of thing
then we would be able to
identify that these moons existed.
The other way to do it is to time the
transit of the planet.
So
planets and their hypothetical moons in
orbit around a distant star would orbit.
So the center of mass between the planet
and the moon
went around the star in a regular
repeatable period.
But the transits would occur slightly
offset from that if you were just
looking for the transit of the large
planet. Because sometimes the planet
will cross the face of the star first
trailed by the moon. At other times, the
moon will be doing the trailing and the
leading object as the transit occurs
will be the planet.
And this should lead to a signature in
terms of accurately timing the dips in
the light. You don't have to see the dip
in the light caused by the small moon.
You can just see the effect of the
timing of the fact that the two are in
orbit around each other. meaning that
the center of mass is regular but the
position of the planet varies slightly.
And one of the objects discovered as a
transiting planet by the Kepler space
mission was Kepler 1625b
and this was observed. The transit was
about 1 and a4 hours early on one
occasion suggesting that the planet was
ahead of the center of mass and the moon
was trailing and so this was the very
first detection of a possible exomoon.
The planet is an enormous super Jupiter,
10 times the mass of Jupiter. And its
moon orbiting what we think is 3 million
kilometers from the planet
is about the size of Neptune.
So this is a very extreme situation. But
of course, as with all things, bigger is
easier to detect and you need a big moon
in a nice orbit around the planet.
that's going to mean that the timing
works such that uh we can see that
offset of 3 and 1/2 hours. Um now the
interesting thing about this one was
that it was suggested by looking at that
timing but that the Hubble Space
Telescope followed up and saw a second
smaller dip. So there are two
observations, one in terms of the
transit timing and two in terms of the
secondary light drop caused by the moon
and that is much more solid evidence as
a result especially as the both gave the
same result of three and a half hour
time difference. Now that if we can
confirm that with more observations this
would be superb. There are some people
that are saying no no no this this is
not right. Uh but that seems to happen a
lot and gradually the debate will either
come down on one side or the other.
So that's Kepler 1625 the star be the
planet and its large Neptune sized moon.
Here's another one HD 206893.
This is a relatively young F-Type star.
a little hotter and a little more
massive. 130% the sun's mass and 6,600
Kelvin instead of 5,800.
So, a bit more powerful and hotter. 133
light years away from us. And we have
confirmed the existence of a planet.
This was detected by direct imaging in
fact rather than by the transit method.
And so we can see a slight red
coloration to it possibly due to the
presence of a lot of dust also in orbit
around the young star. And we know that
planet B is 9.6 astronomical units away.
So in approximately the orbit of Saturn
I suppose and taking about 25 25.6 years
Saturn takes 29 to go around the sun.
So, a Saturn like orbit,
a super Jupiter, 1.25 times the radius,
but maybe actually so massive at 28
Jupiter masses that this isn't really a
planet. This is a brown dwarf. So, well,
you know, we don't really um always know
what we're talking about when we refer
to these things by these labels. It's a
a super Jupiter object. 28 Jupiter
masses. Call it a brown dwarf or a
planet. I don't really care.
There's a third member of the troop
which is planet C. And this is in a
Jupiter-like orbit, 3.5 AU from the star
going around in 5.7 years. So interior
to the orbit of Jupiter, perhaps more in
the edge of the asteroid belt in our
solar system. Um and again a super
Jupiter 1 and a half times the uh
diameter and 12.7 times the mass. Now
that's just below the range that we
would decide to classify this as a small
brown dwarf, but only just because that
would be 13. So any variation in that
12.7 and this might get reclassified as
a brown dwarf as well. But we're talking
about moons and the interesting thing is
that planet B
has been tracked in its orbit observing
it directly and its motion seems to
wobble. The VT uh gravity instrument
down in Chile has suggested that planet
B has a moon about 40% the mass of
Jupiter. So bigger than Neptune in an
orbit of 3/4 of a year, 9 months going
around this planet itself. U and so
again this is subject to confirmation.
We're not absolutely certain at this
point.
This is WASP 39. Wasp. It was a the
acronym for a a wide field spectroscopic
survey. And it was also looking for um
planets with an array of telescopes,
small ones, all looking for transits.
And it was able to discover a Saturn
sized planet back in 2011 in a very
close in orbit. 4 days to go around its
sunlike star. So that's uh very very
close and therefore very very hot 776
C. So uh very high temperature at its
cloud tops
likely therefore to be boiling off quite
a lot of its atmosphere.
And that's significant because when they
looked at the spectrum of this object
they found sulfur dioxide in quite large
amounts. Now, that was initially thought
to be coming from the planet, but a
recent paper has suggested that actually
this is more likely to be coming from a
volcanic moon, rather similar to the way
that a lot of sulfur dioxide is
disgorgged by Io orbiting around Jupiter
and ends up in a a Taurus, a disc, 3D
disc around the equatorial plane of
Jupiter.
And it might be that that is what we're
seeing here. So super volcano eruptions
on a moon. So it's not the moon itself
that we've discovered, but the plumes of
material that may well be coming from
it.
So that was W wasp 39 and it's planet B
and its moon. This is W wasp 49.
Different object. Another hot Jupiter.
This time 2.8 8day long orbit. And
observed in the spectrum, we have clouds
of sodium, sodium ions around the star.
And this could also point to another
volcanic satellite or material being
blasted off the surface of a rocky body
in an 8-hour orbit around the uh the
planet. So this is W wasp 49AB
is the planet because there are multiple
stars in the WASP 49 system. So this is
the star A, the primary star has a
planet B and that that possibly then has
a moon going around it emitting volcanic
material. Quite incredible that we are
beginning to get onto the trail of some
of these things.
Um, a different object now, Beta
Picturing
around Beta Picture
star, somewhat hotter than the sun, 63
light years away, a young star with a
dust disc. And uh, there's probably
planets forming within that dust disc.
And we think we've detected a pair of
them, B and C. You can see in the image
to the bottom right there, the Beta
Pictorius star in the middle and
the dust disc further out with the
infrared revealing that and then the
planets B and C marked. And in the
animation at the top, that is an
animated [clears throat] image of the
planet B being tracked around. And then
we got a series of stills from that
during 2014 through to 2018 tracking the
orbit. So this is being directly imaged
and uh it's amazing that we can do that.
So first detected 2008. It's an 11 times
Jupiter mass planet in a 21-year long
orbit and uh it's a super Jupiter 1.5
times the diameter. Now, it's actually
very hot. Um, 1,700 Kelvin. That's
because although this is a 25, sorry,
21-year long orbit, which you would say
is a sort of Saturn like orbit, this is
a very powerful star. This is an A type
star. So, our sun is G type. You'd have
to go all the way through the F-Type
stars that are hotter than that and then
get into the A type stars. So these are
larger with a larger surface area with a
higher temperature
on the surface of the star pumping out
energy. And so uh this is heating the
planet considerably. And this one as
well is suspected of having another of
these large Neptune mass moons around
it. Now we're awaiting any sort of
realistic confirmation of that. So maybe
I'll have to do another video when we've
managed to confirm or indeed reject some
of these uh exomoon detections.
Another one, DH Tori. This is a dual red
dwarf star. A pair of red dwarfs in a
binary system. DH and Di Tori are
orbiting around each other 456 light
years away from uh the sun. We have
found a planet, planet B. I'm sorry that
should be in lower case and uh that that
is somewhat indistinct in terms of the
mass between eight and 50 times the mass
of Jupiter. So again, super Jupiter size
through to quite a decentsized um brown
dwarf is that range and another
detection of an object potentially
orbiting around this. That's about
onetenth of the mass of the either
planet or red uh brown dwarf.
The names get a bit crazy here. There's
a star V14 Centuri, which is a protoar
pre- main sequence, very, very young.
Hasn't yet kicked off nuclear fusion in
its core. It's still shining by the heat
released from gravitational energy as it
shrinks. And it also goes under the
designation J1407
lowercase B in terms of the planet that
was being detected. Because we have a
transiting planet, we can see in the
light curve in the image at the lower
right this object planet B somewhere
between five and 20 times the mass of
Jupiter. So again spanning the super
Jupiter to low-end brown dwarfsized
objects going around it. And we think
that the orbit of this takes it around
in a very very elliptical path. You can
see that in the orbital diagram at the
top there and that there is a dust disc
shown to scale around the planet not
around the star. So this is a planet
with its own dust disc or in other words
very significant rings rather like
Saturn and we think that within those
rings there are moons either formed or
forming and so we could be seeing the
same process of rings and moons that we
see at the planet Saturn here in a very
young planet in this very young star
system.
Moving on, we get to HD189733b,
the star at K type orange dwarf, 65
light years from the sun with another
hot Jupiter planet. We're very good at
detecting hot Jupiters because they
transit very often. And you can see the
dips in the light curve uh repeating
down to the same depth at regular
intervals there in the data at the right
hand side of the screen. And this is a
hot Jupiter discovered in 2005
and very close in.3
sorry 0.03 of an astronomical unit. So
the temperature at the cloud tops is
over a,000 degrees for this one. And we
think it might have two moons. So this
is the first planet to have dis
potentially had a pair of moons
discovered.
We can see it in two different ways. One
is that the light from the planet seems
to vary periodically when we study the
planet's light directly and indicating
there's possibly a pair of moons going
around it. And the spectrum she seems to
show ions of sodium and potassium.
Again, these are likely to have been
boiled off small rocky worlds rather
than a large gas giant. Um, but again,
this is so large you might classify it
as a binary member of a pair of stars,
one of which is a brown dwarf. But, uh,
so, uh, are these really exomoons? Well,
we're not sure.
Another one, WASP 12. There are a lot of
these, aren't there? This is another
sunlike star and it's got two small red
dwarf companions. You can see those as
capital B and C on the diagram there. So
we have the sunlike star in the left of
the diagram, WASP 12. And then that's W
wasp 12, capital A. And then capital B
and capital C are its two red dwarf
companions. But WASP 12 lowercase B is a
planet orbiting the primary sunlike
star. And this is a scorched Jupiter.
Not just a hot Jupiter. The temperature
of the cloud tops of this one is 3,000
Kelvin.
This is so close in just uh 50 times
closer to the star than we are to the
sun. Um getting absolutely roasted. Um
and we think it's about one and a half
times the mass of Jupiter, but it's
losing mass at a tremendous rate. the
materials being boiled off it by the
extreme temperature and then forming
into a ring around the star which will
gradually dissipate over time as the
planet is being evaporated um if it
survives long. I shall be amazed.
But we think there is one and possibly
two bodies in orbit around this. Again,
detected by variations in the light of
the planet itself.
And that's not the strongest of
evidence. I would say
the bodies might be other members of the
uh planetary system. They might be
Trojan asteroids
following around in the same orbit as
the large super Jupiter scorched Jupiter
planet um rather than proper moons. So
far, we don't really know. And it does
seem that this close to the star with
this huge amount of mass loss going on,
it would be quite difficult to see how a
moon could remain attached and not end
up uh getting far enough away from the
planet to be torn away by the gravity of
the star. The hill sphere around the
planet is likely to be quite small.
That's the region in which its gravity
would dominate due to the proximity to
this huge stellar companion.
So what about these exomoons? Do we
think that any of them are going to be
candidates for being habitable worlds in
their own right? Well, many of the large
planets in the habitable zones of their
stars have been discovered. And although
the planets themselves are probably not
suitable for Earthlike life, any large
moons orbiting around them would also be
in the habitable zone. And I actually
discovered one called KOI5626.
Um, Kepler object of interest 5626 if
you want to go and look it up. And
this is a Saturn sized planet in a
13-monthl long orbit around a star
that's just 200C hotter than the sun,
putting it slap in the pl uh planetary
habitable zone. Um, of course it's a gas
giant planet, so it itself is not
habitable, but uh would really really
like to be able to get some uh data to
measure either a small transit or a
transit timing change for this. Now,
it's difficult because it takes 13
months to go round and you only get one
transit every 13 months. So you you
you've got to try to prove that uh the
transit timing is changing. It's going
to take you a century to get enough data
to see enough uh transits to be able to
get a realistic idea of what's going on.
You're going to need to have at least
eight transits, I would say, to get a
statistical analysis to show the
presence of a planet. Um but we might be
able to do this
sometimes. uh you know we can get enough
telescope time together over a very long
period of time. Who knows? Um
but the other source of heat is the
planet itself. And some of these larger
super Jupiter stroke brown dwarf planets
can be 1500 Kelvin themselves and hot
enough to act as a heat source to warm
an orbiting world, a satellite moon. So
even if the uh planet was nowhere near
the primary star, maybe the exom moon
could be heated by radiation from its
parent planet.
And this is Kepler 1708b.
This is a Jupiterized planet orbiting a
sunlike star. So similar to the one that
I found,
but [clears throat] this one's in a
2-year orbit, 1.6 AU. So that's rather
like the orbit of Mars going around
putting it in to the uh habitable zone
and uh
this would uh be another possible
candidate there. detection of faint
transits
uh was made in 2021 and it looks like
there's a super earthsized moon two to
three times the size of our earth going
in orbit around it but again not quite
confirmed.
If you want to go truly exotic, we have
a jewel rogue planet each of about uh
that says four solar masses there. And
it doesn't mean four solar masses, it
means four Jupiter masses. Sorry,
there's a fault in the text. And these
two objects are free of any primary
star. So they're wandering the galaxy,
orbiting around each other. and they
have an exom moon candidate 1.7 times
the diameter of Earth, but it's only
been one transit event that's been
detected by the Spitzer Space Telescope
here. Um, now that puts them in the
habitable zone, but the system's only 10
million years old. So, uh, that's very
young, not long enough for life to have
evolved in any habitable exo object
going around these rather strange rogue
planets. But it's fascinating that we're
finding these. And of course, being
rogue planets, they are heated by the
heat of formation, and they won't be
massive enough to get anywhere near
triggering nuclear fusion. As I say,
they're four Jupiter masses, not four
solar masses. Sorry about the mistake in
the text there.
And Tabby Star, Tabby Star hit the
headlines in 2019 for its very very
peculiar behavior with the light curve
bouncing up and down and people got very
excited about there possibly being an
alien Dyson sphere or partially complete
Dyson sphere around the star. some sort
of alien artifact of a mega structure
creating all these dips in the light.
And there have been a dozens of
explanations. I've done a whole video
about Taby's star. Um, but one of them
is that this is the disruption of an
exom moon that has created a whole swarm
of fragments in orbit around Taby's
star. And that's what's uh creating this
rather bizarre light curve. So this
would not be an exom moon. It would be
the remains of one if that turned out to
be true.
So thanks very much for listening and I
hope you've enjoyed that. I'm sorry
about the uh typing mistake on the slide
there. But uh anyway, I'm doing these
live. So uh there we are. Thanks again.
Bye now.